FIP-0063: Transition to new drand   :racing_car: `fastnet` network (#652)
filecoin-project/FIPs: FIPS/fip-00xx.md

---

> fip: "to be assigned"

Reviewer: FIP-0063

For further details on these new features and their implementation we refer the reader to [this blogpost](https://drand.love/blog/2022/02/21/multi-frequency-support-and-timelock-encryption-capabilities/) and the complementary, comprehensive [FAQ doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/16QJG3Z-Kr0mN6snQz8cm0NnMXpYBpelKyvCf2oo1Zgc/edit?usp=sharing).

## Change Motivation

- The existing drand network is expected to be deprecated in Q4 2023 or Q1 2024.
- The Filecoin network should switch to the new drand mainnet networks before the existing network is deprecated.

> - The new drand network is going to be producing **smaller signatures**, which means that Filecoin headers will be more lightweight.

Reviewer: How much smaller?

> - This new drand network also **allows to perform timelock encryption**, which will be a valuable feature for FVM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- This new drand network also **allows to perform timelock encryption**, which will be a valuable feature for user-deployed actors.
```

Reviewer: could you please provide an example of a potential use case?

Author: Which one do you prefer?
- helps preventing MEV (or do you say SPEV?)
- allows to run sealed bid auctions easily
- can help with airdrop and NFT minting too, to hide some data until a given time 
- data retention policy, where data is secret only for a given time, such as responsible disclosure of vulnerabilities

## Specification

Currently drand verification is performed in two stages:

1. by hashing the previous beacon’s signature and the current beacon round number using SHA256 and comparing the digest to the randomness in the payload, and
2. verifying the signature over the hashed randomness is valid for the group public key (using BLS12-381).

For signatures on the unchained scheme, the only change required is to omit the previous beacon’s signature when creating a SHA256 digest for comparison against the randomness. Note that the new network also have swaps the way it does BLS signatures, and uses G1 for signatures and G2 for public keys. This means shorter signatures, but it also means the signature verification algorithm needs to be updated in order to be instantiated over G1 instead of G2.

> 

Reviewer: plz link the library, specifically the signature verification change

- users of the existing drand client libraries will not be able to correctly verify beacons emitted from unchained networks (as they do not contain a `PreviousSignature` field and use a different group for signatures) without updating their clients
- the chain info (chain hash, group public key, etc) embedded in the drand config of the relevant Filecoin implementation will need to be updated
- URLs for accessing drand beacons from relays on the new network will require to include the chain hash (e.g. `[https://api.drand.sh/public/latest](http://api.drand.sh/public/latest)` may become something to the effect of `https://api.drand.sh/deadbeefcafebabe/public/latest`)
- Filecoin implementations must consume every 10th round from drand rather than each consecutive round (to maintain a 30sec block time)
- Beacons created with the scheme containing G1 and G2 swapped will also be unable to be verified by existing implementations.
- Verification of beacons from existing schemes, including the G1 swap, are fully supported in the updated drand client.

Therefore, switching to the new drand network needs to be done through a Filecoin network upgrade.

## Test Cases

> In order to enable effective testing, we suggest creating a new, temporary testnets with a small number of clients from each widely supported Filecoin implementation. 

Reviewer: Does fastnet has a testnet? Any reason why we need to start a new network instead of having filecoin testnet connects to fastnet (or its testnet) to test?

Author: We're happy to have the filecoin testnet connecting to fastnet directly if that's fine on your side..

We do have the same scheme running in a testnet network too, but it's less resilient that our mainnet networks:
https://pl-us.testnet.drand.sh/f3827d772c155f95a9fda8901ddd59591a082df5ac6efe3a479ddb1f5eeb202c/info

Reviewer 2: There's really no reason not to use fastnet for testing. On the Filecoin side, it's probably fine to go with testnet, yeah.

## Incentive Considerations

Unchained randomness allows for lighter drand nodes since they effectively become “stateless” and can delegate storing historical beacons to Filecoin, IPFS or some other storage system. The longer we keep a “chained beacon” running, the bigger the burden on the nodes running it becomes over time (requires more storage, costs more, etc.) and the more likely we are to see partners leaving the League of Entropy and causing an undesirable centralization of drand nodes.

The new network is also producing smaller beacon signatures (half the size of the current ones), which means lighter Filecoin headers.

## Product Considerations

**Future Product Consideration - why is the new drand network an improved network?**

> - The Timelock Encryption feature is only available when using unchained randomness, since we need to be able to predict which message will be signed at what time. Switching would allow us to integrate Timelock Encryption natively on Filecoin, once FVM lands. Expect another FIP focused on Timelock and FVM soon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The Timelock Encryption feature is only available when using unchained randomness, since we need to be able to predict which message will be signed at what time. Switching would allow us to integrate Timelock Encryption natively on Filecoin. Expect another FIP focused on Timelock and FVM soon.
```
